# Exploration of COVID-19 Impacts on CitiBike Ridership in New York City

In this [Tableau Public dashboard](https://public.tableau.com/profile/lauren.toothaker#!/vizhome/CitiBikeAnalysis_16207818836480/COVID-19ImpactsonRidership?publish=yes), I explore the impact that COVID-19 had on ridership in New York City's CitiBike program. This report forcuses on data for March 2019, March 2020, and March 2021. 

Starting with the visualization of the map with locations of all of the bike stations and their utilization, we can see that the darkest (most utilized) satations are found close to Grand Central Terminal, Union Square, Flatiron District and the Garment District. Zooming in on these locations in the map, you can identify these circles based on the darkest circles. Along side the map, there are tables showing the highest usage start stations and end stations as well as a look at the trips that have start and stop locations corresponding with one of the top ten highly utilized stations. With this information, we can see some of the more popular routes that riders take. It seems, at a glance, that starting at the West St & Chambers St station, possibly touring the city on bike and then returning back to the same station is a fairly popular day activity!

The data and corresponding visuals show a dramatic shift in utilization between the three months over the different years. Starting at the highest level, ridership as a whole saw a decrease from 2019 to 2020 but then returned to numbers larger in 2021 than they were in 2019. Looking closer at the breakdown of short-term customers and annual subscribers, there is essentially a complete switch. In 2019 and 2020, annual subscribers outnumbered short-term customers by quite a bit. Subscribers show as over 1.2 million in 2019 and over 900,000 in 2020 while customers show as just over 106,000 and 154,000 in the respective years. In 2021 however, the number of sumbscribers was just over 177,000 while customers show as over 1.3 million. 

By diving further into the data to look at the ridership across each day of March for each year, we can see this shift happening more or a more real-time scnenario. Included in these visuals are some noteable regulations and events that are documented alongside the COVID-19 crisis in New York State. There is a relatively steady decline in ridership between March 12-March 25 corresponding with a governor ordered containment zone located in New Rochelle. Most noteable is the first buisness day after the order that all non-essential workers must stay home. On this day, March 23rd, 2020, the ridership for both customers and subscribers drops to the lowest it gets the entire month. Only 332 trips were documented by customers and 3,662 by subscribers. Looking then at how March 2021 fairs for ridership, there appears to be a rather consistent amount of subscribers utilizing the bikes and a rather inconsistent amount of customers using the bikes.

The last visual included in the story shows each day in March 2020's hourly trip utilization. At the start of March, there are noteable spikes in utilization, primarily by subscribers, at standard commuter hours. As COVID-19 events unfold, these obvious peaks virtually disappear. In fact, on March 23rd and again on March 28th, ridership is next to nothing while both dates correspond directly with an order for halting non-essential workers.

Overall, this analysis shows that prior to COVID-19, a large number of people seemed to utilize the CitiBike program to commute to and from work. A huge proportion of riders were also subscribers. While there are likely other factors at play, the impact that COVID-19 had on the CitiBike ridership is apparent. the return to pre-COVID numbers provides a positive outlook on the future of the program still. Watching the proportion of customers versus subsribers will be a good indicator of the city's population returning back to normal operations, or at least a look at what post-COVID normal might become.
